Backpack: Has two straps and can be worn on the back, keeping the hands free. Holds up to 400 coins.
Barrel: A wooden barrel that holds 40 gallons (320 pints) of liquid.
Bedroll: A heavy wooden blanket with a small pillow.
Bell: A 1” brass bell.
Belt pouch: A leather pouch that holds up to 50 coins.
Block and tackle: Used for hauling or lifting heavy objects. Reduces the effective weight by 1/4. Requires 4 times as much rope.
Box, iron: A solid iron casket. A large box can hold up to 800 coins; a small box can hold up to 250 coins.
Caltrops: Small metal spikes sufficient to cover a 5’ square area. Creatures moving through the area have a 2-in-6 chance of treading on a spike. Victims suffer a 50% reduction of movement rate until they are healed.
Candle: A candle casts a dim light in a 5’ radius and burns for 1 hour.
Chain: A 10’ length of heavy, iron chain.
Chalk: Useful for making markings on stone.
Chest, wooden: A large chest can hold up to 1,000 coins; a small chest can hold up to 300 coins.
Chisel: Used with a hammer for chipping away stone.
Cooking pots: Pots and pans for campfire cooking.
Crowbar: 2–3’ long and made of solid iron. Can be used for forcing doors and other objects open.
Firewood: A bundle of dry wood. Burns for 8 hours.
Fishing rod and tackle: A rod, line, hook, and bait box.
Grappling hook: Made of solid iron, with 3 or 4 prongs. Useful for anchoring ropes.
Hammer: Can be used for construction or as a mallet with iron or wooden spikes.
Holy symbol: Some divine spell casters are required to own a holy symbol, often worn as a necklace. The quality of a holy symbol may optionally alter its effectiveness when used by a character attempting to turn the undead. A gold holy symbol grants a +1 bonus to the 2d6 roll for the affected Hit Dice of undead monsters. A wooden holy symbol incurs a –1 penalty to the 2d6 roll which determines the success of the turning attempt.
Holy water: Water from a holy spring. It is used in some religious rituals and inflicts damage on undead monsters (see Weapon Combat Stats in Old-School Essentials). Holy water does not retain its power if stored in any other container than the special vials it is blessed in.
Ink: A vial of black ink. Coloured ink costs double. Sufficient for about 50 pages of writing.
Iron spikes: May be used for wedging doors open or shut, as an anchor to attach a rope to, and many other purposes.
Ladder: Simple wooden construction. Very encumbering.
Lantern: Can be closed to hide the light. Burns one oil flask every four hours (24 turns). Casts light in a 30’ radius.
Lantern, bullseye: Can be closed to hide the light. Burns one oil flask every four hours (24 turns) (1 turn = 10 m in). Casts light in a narrow beam, 100’ long and 20’ wide at the end.
Lock: A basic iron lock with a key.
Magnifying glass: Used for studying fine details.
Manacles: Iron manacles with a chain. Used for binding hands or feet.
Marbles: A bag of colourful glass beads.
Mining pick: For breaking rock.
Mirror: Useful for looking around corners or for reflecting a gaze attack.
Musical instrument: A stringed instrument (e.g. a lute or mandolin) or a wind instrument (e.g. a flute or pipe). The listed price is for an instrument of basic quality. Higher quality instruments can cost up to ten times as much.
Oil flask: A flask of oil fuels a lantern for four hours (24 turns). In addition to fuelling lanterns, oil can be used as a weapon:
▶ Throwing: An oil flask may be lit on fire and thrown (see Weapon Combat Stats in Old-School Essentials).
▶ Pools: Oil that is poured on the ground and lit covers a diameter of 3 feet and burns for 1 turn, inflicting damage on any character or monster moving through the pool.
▶ Immunity: Burning oil does not harm monsters that have a natural flame attack.
Paper or parchment: Approximately 1’-square sheets.
Pole, 10’: A 2” thick wooden pole useful for poking and prodding suspicious items in a dungeon.
Quill: A large feather sharpened into a writing point.
Rations, iron: Dried and preserved food to be carried on long voyages when securing fresh food may be uncertain.
Rations, standard: Fresh, unpreserved food.
Rope: Can hold the weight of approximately three human-sized beings.
Sack: A large sack can hold up to 600 coins; a small sack up to 200 coins.
Saw: A hand saw for cutting wood.
Scroll case: An oiled leather tube with a cap. Not completely watertight.
Sledgehammer: A big heavy hammer for breaking rock.
Spade or shovel: For excavating earth.
Stakes and mallet: A wooden mallet and three 18” long stakes. Valuable when confronting vampires.
Tent: Large enough for 2 adult humans.
Thieves’ tools: This kit contains all of the tools needed to pick locks.
Tinder box: Used to light fires, including torches. Using a tinder box takes one round. There is a 2-in-6 chance of success per round.
Torch: A torch burns for 1 hour (6 turns), clearly illuminating a 30’ radius. Torches may also be used in combat (see Weapon Combat Stats in Old-School Essentials).
Twine: A wound ball of thin cord or string. Can support up to 30 pounds of weight.
Vial: A glass vial that can hold up to half a pint of liquid.
Waterskin: A container, made of hide, that holds 2 pints (1 quart) of fluid.
Whistle: Useful for signalling or faking bird calls.
Wolfsbane: This herb can be used to repel lycanthropes. The creature must be hit with the herb in melee combat.

